October 1996


                  Statement Analysis: 
         What Do Suspects' Words Really Reveal?

              By Susan H. Adams, M.A.

_____________________
Special Agent Adams teaches statement analysis as part of
interviewing and interrogation courses at the FBI Academy.
____________________

(In statement analysis, investigators examine words, independent
of case facts, to detect deception.)


Susan Smith stood outside her burgundy sedan and released the
parking brake. The car plunged down the ramp into South
Carolina's Long Lake, with her sons, Michael, 3, and Alexander,
14 months, strapped into their car  seats. To cover her actions,
Susan told police that the boys were abducted at gunpoint,
launching a nationwide search for the victims and their abductor.
During the investigation, Susan tearfully told reporters, "My
children wanted me. They needed me. And now I can't help them."1
Yet, the boys' father, David, who believed Susan's story, tried
to reassure her by saying: "They're okay. They're going to be
home soon."2

Police subsequently arrested Susan for the murder of her
children. She was tried and convicted and is currently serving a
life sentence in a South Carolina correctional institution.

Many investigators use a technique called "statement analysis" to
discern the truth in statements  like the ones given by Susan and
David Smith. In statement analysis, investigators examine words, 
independent of case facts, to detect deception. They also remain
alert for information omitted and question why the suspect may
have done so. Investigators then analyze the clues
unintentionally provided by a suspect and use this insight during
the subsequent interview.

In the case of Susan Smith, by analyzing the statements made by
the victims' parents, one could conclude that the father believed
the boys were alive and the mother knew the children were dead.
The key to this deduction lies in simple English grammar,
specifically, verb tense. The father referred to the  children in
the present tense; the mother used the past tense. Of all times,
when the "abducted" children really would need their mother, she
speaks of them in the past tense, e.g., "They needed me." The
children could no longer want or need her because they were no
longer alive.

This article gives a brief overview of statement analysis. It
examines four components of statement analysis--parts of speech
(pronouns, nouns, and verbs), extraneous information, lack of
conviction, and the balance of the statement. 

A word of caution is warranted here. There is much more to
statement analysis than what is provided in this article; space
limitations preclude incorporating other statement analysis
components, such as the remaining parts of speech and the
numerous indicators of missing information.

Still, armed with the information presented in this article,
investigators will be able to use these basic techniques to gain
insight into a suspect prior to conducting an interview. By
learning more about a suspect and determining whether that person
is being deceptive, they have a much better chance of identifying
the guilty party and gaining a confession.

THE TECHNIQUE

Statement analysis follows a two-step process. First,
investigators determine what is typical of a truthful statement,
referred to as the norm. They then look for any deviation from
this norm. Truthful statements differ from fabricated ones in
both content and quality.3

Although spoken words can be analyzed, investigators
inexperienced in statement analysis will find it easier to begin
by examining written statements. Investigators can make
transcripts of oral statements. Or, even better, they can have
suspects write a statement that details what they did from the
time they woke up until the time they went to bed. This account
provides a totally untainted version of the day's events and
increases the validity of the analysis.

Statement analysis is an aid that can be used to obtain a
confession; it is not an end in itself. Therefore, whenever
possible, investigators should analyze the statement before
interviewing the suspect.

IMPORTANT PARTS OF SPEECH

Parts of speech form the foundation of statement analysis. To
analyze a statement, investigators first need to examine the
individual parts of speech, particularly pronouns, nouns, and
verbs, and to establish the norm for each. If a deviation from
the norm appears, they then should ask, "Why?"

Pronouns 

Pronouns are parts of speech that take the place of nouns. Common
examples of personal pronouns include I, me, you, he, she, we,
they, and it. In statement analysis, particular attention should
be given to the personal pronouns "I" and "we" and all possessive
pronouns, such as my, our, your, his, her, etc.

The Pronoun "I"

Investigators have noted that truthful people give statements
using the pronoun "I," which is first person, singular. Any
deviation from this norm deserves close scrutiny, for it could be
an indication that the person is not totally committed to the
facts in the statement and, therefore, is not telling the whole
truth.

The following written narrative begins with a clear commitment,
then shows a definite lack of commitment:

   "I got up at 7:00 when my alarm went off. I took a shower and  
   got dressed. I decided to go out for breakfast. I went to the  
   McDonald's on the corner. Met a man who lives nearby. Talked   
   with him for a few minutes. I finished breakfast and drove to  
   work."

The first four sentences of the statement match the norm of first
person, singular--the use of the pronoun "I"; the next two
sentences show deviation, because this pronoun is missing from
the statement. What caused the writer to stop using the pronoun
"I"?

Any change in the use of pronouns is significant, and at this
point, investigators should realize that the statement now
becomes devoid of personal involvement. Could there be tension
between the writer and the man mentioned in the statement? During
the interview, investigators should draw out specifics about this
relationship to determine if this part of the narrative  is
really true or if the writer omitted information.
  
 I versus We
 
Because using the first person, singular pronoun is the norm for
truthful statements, investigators need to look for a lack of the
pronoun "I" and overuse of the pronoun "we," which is first
person, plural. The following version of a teen-ager's account
when asked to relate what he did on Saturday evening illustrates
the norm:

       "I met four friends at the movie theater, watched a movie, 
        then stopped to get something to eat with them. We had a  
        few drinks at the bar on the way home. I stayed until     
        just after midnight. I drove home...."

The following version of the same account, when contrasted with
the above statement, indicates deviation from the norm:

        "We all met at the movie theater, watched a movie, then   
         stopped to get something to eat. We had a few drinks at  
         the bar on the way home. We stayed until just after      
         midnight. We each drove home...."


Because the second statement contains only "we," instead of the
expected norm, which uses mostly "I," the investigator should
wonder why there is no individual involvement. Perhaps the
teenager hopes to conceal something or at least to avoid sole
responsibility for some act. 

The Pronoun "We"

In speech and the written word, linguists consider the shortest
way to say something as the easiest and clearest way to
communicate. The pronoun "we" is a short, clear way to describe
one's self and others after proper introductions have been made.
"We" also denotes togetherness; it indicates a relationship
between persons.

Omission of the pronoun "we" is significant, particularly when
the individuals are spouses. In the following versions of an
account of events given by a husband, the first statement
indicates the norm; the second one denotes deviation:

      "My wife and I were invited to a neighbor's 50th birthday   
       party. We arrived at the party a little late. The party    
       was still in full swing when we left for home."

                            * * *
      "My wife and I were invited to a neighbor's 50th birthday   
       party. My wife and I arrived at the party a little late.   
       The party was still in full swing when my wife and I left  
       for home."

The second statement reveals distance between the husband and his
wife. Once the husband introduces his wife into the statement,
using the pronoun "we" is the shortest way to communicate. Yet,
the husband avoids this word. Why? Perhaps because there is no
"togetherness" in the relationship.

If later that night the wife is murdered, and the husband, when
recounting the day's activities, provides a statement devoid of
the pronoun "we," investigators questioning the husband should
focus on the couple's relationship. If the husband admits to
marital problems, but vehemently denies any involvement in the
death, investigators may clear him as a suspect, barring contrary
evidence. However, if the husband responds that the couple was
very close, investigators should be wary, because statement
analysis reveals otherwise.

A shift from "they" to "we" also is significant, for it reveals
personal involvement. In white-collar crime cases, the guilty
person who denies complicity may find it difficult to keep     
the pronoun "we" out of a statement completely. In such
instances, investigators need to search the entire written
statement for "we." Then, during the interview, they should focus
on the transaction described with "we." This pronoun indicates
that the writer was involved.

Another example of this shift in the use of pronouns often can be
found in alleged rape reports. In the following two statements
taken from rape reports, the focus is on the pronoun "we":

             "He forced me into the woods,"
                       versus
               "We went into the woods."

The first statement represents the norm. The second statement,
which contains the pronoun "we," is a deviation from the norm.

Veteran rape investigators are alert to the sudden appearance of 
the pronoun "we" in a victim's  statement. From their experience 
interviewing rape victims, they have normed the rape victim to
use the pronouns "he" and "I," not the pronoun "we," to describe
the assailant and herself.

Because the pronoun "we" denotes togetherness, the investigator
reading "we" in an alleged rape statement should ask if the
victim knew the assailant and if they were together before the
rape occurred. If the victim denies this, there is reason to
believe the statement is a fabrication.

In reports of an abduction, the use of the pronoun "we" also can
indicate that the victim may not be telling the whole truth. For
example, a young woman who reported that she had been abducted at
a shopping center provided the following written statement:
    
       "I parked and started getting out of my car when a white   
        male about 200 pounds, 6 feet tall approached me and told 
        me to get in the car or he would hurt me. He then got in  
        the back. I got in the front and began to drive. He told  
        me to drive west on the highway. He asked me if I had any 
        money. I told him no. We drove for about an hour. During  
        that hour, he hit me repeatedly on the right side of my   
        face. When we got to the exit, I told him I had no gas.   
        He got mad and told me to get off the exit. We went       
        straight off the exit for about 4-5 miles. He told me to  
        turn down the first street on my left. We went down it    
        about 1/4 of a mile. He told me to stop. He opened the    
        door, put both feet out, hit me, and took off walking     
        quickly. He took off to the east of where I was parked.   
        After that, I took off and lost sight of him."

Investigators experienced in statement analysis would question
the truthfulness of the above declaration. A true abduction
statement, when normed, includes phrases like "He forced me to
drive..." or "He made me get off at the exit...." Traumatized
victims who are telling the truth do not use the pronoun "we" to
describe assailants and themselves.

Investigators concluded that the above statement revealed
deception. When interviewed, the woman subsequently confessed
that no abduction occurred. She was, in fact, with a man she
knew.

Possessive Pronouns

Possessive pronouns, e.g., my, our, your, his, her, and their,
reveal the attachment that the writer or speaker acknowledges
toward a  person or object. A suspect will change the pronoun, or
drop the  pronoun completely, when opting not to show possession
or admit association with a particular object or person. For
example, "I was cleaning my gun. I was putting my gun away. The
gun discharged."

This person, wanting to disclaim ownership of the gun that
discharged (either accidentally or intentionally), stopped using
the possessive pronoun "my." It no longer was his gun, under his
control; it became the gun.

Another example can be found in a written statement made by a
person whose home burned to the ground:

    "I left my house right after breakfast to join my friends at  
    the track for the day.... I drove back to my house, made a    
    few phone calls, then went out to dinner with Stan            
    Thompson.... Stan dropped me off at my house around 10:00.    
    After I changed my clothes I left the house to spend the      
    night at my cousin Tom's. Around midnight we heard fire       
    engines and got up to see what was going on."

In this account, after the writer consistently used the pronoun
"my" to describe his house, he omitted the pronoun the last time
it was mentioned. Was it because the  house burned down, and it
was no longer his house? If so, then this change should have
occurred much later, after midnight, when the  writer learned
that the house was burning.

Based on the statements made, investigators should question why
the switch in references occurred the last time the writer was in
the house. Was it because the writer had spread accelerant on the
floor of the house? Was the writer already giving up possession
because he had set the fire? Just as arson investigators try to
discover if valuable possessions have been removed from a house
prior to a fire, those skilled in statement analysis look for the
exact point at which the owner stops taking possession by failing
to use the pronoun "my."

Nouns

Nouns denote persons, places, and things. Yet, nouns take on
different meanings, depending on the individual.

When examining the words used by a suspect, the investigator
needs to note any changes, because a "change of language reflects
a change in reality."4 If suspects substitute a different word
after using one word consistently, they telegraph the fact that
something in their lives has changed. Although language changes
can occur with any part of speech, they are observed more
frequently with nouns.

In a statement written by a suspect in a homicide investigation,
a significant change in noun usage occurred. A young man shot his
wife in the face with a shotgun. The woman died instantly, and
the husband claimed the shooting was accidental. Investigators
asked the man to write a statement of the events that occurred
during the day of the shooting. The husband wrote a detailed
statement, using the noun "wife" seven times to refer to his
wife. He then wrote:

    "...I lost control of the gun. I sensed that the barrel was   
     pointing in Louise's direction and I reacted by grabbing at  
     the gun to get it back under control. When I did this the g  
     gun discharged. It went off once and I looked over and saw   
     blood on Louise's face."

What caused the husband to start using "Louise," his wife's first
name? Did this occur at a significant point in the narrative?

Prior to this point, investigators had normed the husband as
using the noun "wife." When the spouse went to church with her
husband, she was "my wife." When she later called to her husband,
she was "my wife." But when the barrel of the gun was pointing in
her direction and when there was blood on her face, two critial
points in the statement, the spouse was no longer referred to as
"my wife." She became Louise.

Investigators have determined that perpetrators find it nearly
impossible to admit to harming a family member. The husband in
this case could not admit that he had killed his wife. He removed
the family relationship by substituting the name "Louise."

The husband also failed to introduce Louise to the reader. After
using the noun "wife" seven times, the name "Louise" suddenly
appears. The reader does not know    for certain who Louise is.
It only can be assumed that Louise is the wife, but the husband
gave no proper introduction, such as "my wife, Louise."

The norm for healthy relationships is a proper, clear
introduction. But in tumultuous relationships, introductions
often are confusing or  missing completely. The lack of a proper
introduction most likely indicates a poor relationship between
the husband and his wife. Knowledge of this prior to the
interview could assist investigators in uncovering the truth.


Verbs

Verbs express action, either in the past, present, or future. In
statement analysis, the tense of the verb is of utmost
importance. When analyzing statements, investigators  need to
concentrate on the tense of the verbs used. In a truthful
statement, the use of the past tense is the norm, because by the
time a person relates the event, it has already occurred.

For example, the following statement typifies the norm:

   "It happened Saturday night. I went out on my back deck to     
    water the plants. It was almost dark. A man ran out of the    
    bushes. He came onto the deck, grabbed me and knocked me      
    down."

The next statement shows deviation from the norm:

    "It happened Saturday night. I went out on my back deck to    
     water the plants. It was almost dark. A man runs out of the  
     bushes. He comes onto the deck, grabs me and knocks me       
     down."

The shift to present tense is significant, because events
recalled from memory should be stated by using the past tense.
The change to present tense could indicate deception. Knowing
this, an investigator interviewing the victim of the second
statement is forewarned that the account may be fabricated.

The use of past or present tense also is significant when
referring to missing persons. In such cases, the norm is to
describe the person in the present tense, as in, "I just pray
that Jenny is all right."

When children are missing, in the parents' hearts and minds, the
children remain alive, sometimes long after the point of reason.
As evidenced in the Susan Smith case, use of past tense almost
immediately after the alleged abduction showed a significant
deviation from the norm.

EXTRANEOUS INFORMATION

Extraneous information in a statement also can provide clues to
deception. A truthful person with nothing to hide, when asked the
question, "What happened," will recount the events
chronologically and concisely. Any information given that does
not answer this question is extraneous.

People involved in crimes may feel the need to justify their
actions. In such cases, the information in the statements will
not follow a logical time frame or will skirt what really
happened. They also may include more information than is
necessary to tell the story. In such instances, investigators
should scrutinize this extraneous information and ques-tion why
this person felt the need to include it.

For example, in a homicide investigation involving a young woman
shot by her husband, the husband told police officers that he was
cleaning his gun when it accidentally discharged. Investigators
then asked the husband to write a statement about his actions on
the day he shot his wife. He provided a detailed statement,
writing at length about the rust on his gun and a previous
hunting trip. He failed, however, to describe fully his
activities on this specific day. The amount of extraneous
information prompted the investigator to view the  husband as a
suspect.

LACK OF CONVICTION
Another important factor in statement analysis is a person's  
lack of conviction. When analyzing a statement, investigators
should note if the person feigns a loss of memory by repeatedly
inserting "I don't remember" or "I can't recall."

They also should look to see if the person hedges during the
narrative by using such phrases as "I think," "I believe," "to
the best of my knowledge," or "kind of." These phrases, also
called qualifiers, serve to temper the action about to be
described, thereby discounting the message before it even is
transmitted.5 Clearly, the person giving the statement is
avoiding commitment, and warning bells should ring in the
investigator's ears.

The following is a transcript of an oral statement of a college
student who reported that a man broke into her apartment at 3:30
a.m. and raped her. A statement regarding such a traumatic
experience should brim with conviction, which this statement
clearly lacks.

   "He grabbed me and held a knife to my throat. And when I woke  
    up and I was, I mean I was really asleep and I didn't know    
    what was going on, and I kind of you know I was scared and I  
    kind of startled when I woke up, You know, You know I was     
    startled and he, he told, he kept telling me to shut up and   
    he asked me if I could feel the knife."

It is important to consider the phrase, "I kind of startled when
I woke up." Certainly, this is not a normal reaction for a woman
who awakens in the middle of the night to see an unknown man at
her bed and to feel a knife at her throat. The word "terrified"
more appropriately comes to mind. Using the words "kind of
startled" shows a gross deviation from the expected normal
reaction of terror.

Another example of lack of conviction can be found in a written
statement given by a relative of a woman who mysteriously
disappeared. Investigators asked the missing woman's
sister-in-law to recount the activities that took place on the
weekend of the disappearance. After claiming memory lapses and
showing a general lack  of specificity, the sister-in-law ended
her statement with:

    "...that was about it. These were my actions on the weekend   
     to the best I can recall."

Any investigator reading the above statement should seriously
question whether the events were described accurately and
completely.

BALANCE OF THE STATEMENT

A statement given by a suspect or an alleged victim should be
examined by investigators for overall balance. Statements should
be more than just a series of details. They need to sound like an
account of the event.

A truthful statement has three parts. The first part details what
was going on before the event occurred; it places the event in
context. The second part describes the occurrence itself, i.e.,
what happened during the theft, the rape, the fire, etc. The last
part tells what occurred after the event, including actions and
emotions, and should be at least as long as the first part.

The more balanced the three parts of the statement, the greater
the probability that the statement is true.6 A statement
containing the same number of lines in the before, during, and
after parts, i.e., 33 1/3 percent in each part, indi-cates truth,
although some degree of variation from perfect balance can be
expected.

If any part of a statement is incomplete or missing altogether,
then the statement is probably false. The following breakdown of
a statement written by a man whose home burned shows a deviation
too great from the balanced norm. The man provided a 56-line
account of what happened that day, divided as follows:

BEFORE the fire:  33 lines -59.0%
DURING the fire:  16 lines - 28.5%
AFTER the fire:   7 lines - 12.5%.

Investigators concluded that the above distribution indicates
deception, because the three parts of the statement are clearly
out of balance. The "before" section is too long and the "after"
section is too short.

Examination of the statement revealed that in the first part, the
writer provided too much information totally unrelated to the
fire.  This signaled the investigators to ask themselves, "Is the
writer stalling or trying to justify his actions?"

Also, the statement contained sparse information on what happened
after the fire and lacked any indication of emotion. There was no
sign of anger, shock, or sense of loss. The writer, who showed no
concern about the consequences of the fire, ultimately confessed
to setting it.

CONCLUSION

Statements contain a wealth of information far beyond what the
suspect or alleged victim intends to communicate. Fortunately,
investigators can use this information to their benefit.

Statement analysis provides investigators with vital background
data and details about relationships to explore during the
interview process. It also can determine whether the intent of
the statement is to convey or to convince, that is, to convey the
truth or to convince through deception.7 Armed with this
knowledge, investigators can enter the interview room with
increased confidence to identify the perpetrator and gain a
confession.
__________________

Endnotes

1 The Washington Post, November 5, 1994, A15.

2 The Washington Post, July 26, 1995, A7.

3 Udo Undeutsch published this hypothesis in German in 1967. It
also was reported in "The Development of Statement Reality
Analysis," Credibility Assessment, ed. John C. Yuille (The
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, NATO ASI Series, 1989).
The Germans generally are credited with the advancement of
statement analysis for investigative purposes. German
psychologists devised a system to assess the credibility of
statements made by children in child abuse cases. Called
criteria-based content analysis, the technique became mandated in
German courts in 1954 in cases involving a disputed allegation of
sexual abuse of a child.

4 Avinoam Sapir, Scientific Content Analysis (SCAN) (Phoenix, AZ:
Laboratory of Scientific Interrogation, 1987), 52.

5 Walter Weintrab, Verbal Behavior in Everyday Life (New York,
NY: Springer Publishing Co., 1989), 13.

6 Don Rabon, Investigative Discourse Analysis (Durham, NC:
Carolina Academic Press, 1994), 17.

7 Ibid., 35.

                      ________________________